# 2025 Journal

## 2025-01-11

### 2:23 pm

Now that I have fully retired (again) I am resuming work on
the project.
I am auditing three Fields Academy Shared Graduate Courses
and I would like to use Z Notation in my notes.
The courses all assume knowledge of the standard undergraduate 
math definitions for groups, rings, vector spaces, etc.
It would therefore be nice if I could pull in these definitions
for the `mathz` library.

During the past year, I have settled on two Python technologies
for structuring projects, namely:
* use `pyproject.toml` for packaging
* use MkDocs for documentation

I learned about these technologies from material at
[Real Python](https://realpython.com/).
* [Everyday Project Packaging With pyproject.toml
](https://realpython.com/courses/packaging-with-pyproject-toml/)
* [Build Your Python Project Documentation With MkDocs
](https://realpython.com/python-project-documentation-with-mkdocs/)

Both packaging and documentation are conveniently supported at GitHub.
* the distribution package can be installed from GitHub
* the documentation website generated by MkDocs can be viewed on GitHub

The following command installs the `mathz` Python package:
```shell
pip install git+https://github.com/agryman/mathz.git
```

By default, the URL for the documentation is: https://agryman.github.io/mathz/

It is also possible to configure GitHUB to use a custom domain and URL.

At present, I type check the articles in `mathz` using `zsh` shell scripts.
These scripts contain a lot of similar text.
I feel it would be much cleaner to use GNU Make.
This is on my TODO list.

I'd also like to make immediate progress on my math course notes, so
maybe writing yet another shell script is the simplest approach.

At a minimum, I should complete setting up my new Mac Studio since it has large dual monitors
which I'd like to use for note authoring.
I would like to be able to:
1. read lecture handouts, books, and run runs like Macaulay2 and Jupyter
2. write LaTeX documents that contains my notes
3. view the typeset PDF documents of my notes

Do the following to get started:
- [x] type check one `mathz` document
- [x] type check all `mathz` documents
- [x] typeset one `mathz` document
- [x] create a LaTeX document in my `courses` repo that uses `mathz` definitions

#### fuzz

I had to install `fuzz` as follows:
* I copied the `fuzz` executable to `/usr/local/bin/fuzz`
* I copied the `fuzzlib` prelude file to `/usr/local/lib/fuzzlib`
* I copied the `fuzz.sty` style file and all the font files to subdirectories of `~/Library/texmf/`

The following listing shows the complete contents of all subdirectories of `~/Library/texmf/`,
including the installed `mathz` style files and bibliography file.

```text
.
├── bibtex
│   ├── bib
│   │   └── mathz
│   │       └── mathz_references.bib
│   └── bst
├── doc
├── fonts
│   ├── pk
│   │   └── ljfour
│   │       └── public
│   │           └── zed
│   │               ├── oxsz10.600pk
│   │               ├── oxsz10.657pk
│   │               ├── oxsz10.720pk
│   │               ├── oxsz5.600pk
│   │               ├── oxsz6.600pk
│   │               ├── oxsz7.600pk
│   │               ├── oxsz8.600pk
│   │               └── oxsz9.600pk
│   ├── source
│   │   └── public
│   │       └── zed
│   │           ├── oxsz.mf
│   │           ├── oxsz10.mf
│   │           ├── oxsz5.mf
│   │           ├── oxsz6.mf
│   │           ├── oxsz7.mf
│   │           ├── oxsz8.mf
│   │           ├── oxsz9.mf
│   │           ├── zarrow.mf
│   │           ├── zletter.mf
│   │           └── zsymbol.mf
│   └── tfm
│       └── public
│           └── zed
│               ├── oxsz10.tfm
│               ├── oxsz5.tfm
│               ├── oxsz6.tfm
│               ├── oxsz7.tfm
│               ├── oxsz8.tfm
│               └── oxsz9.tfm
├── generic
├── scripts
├── source
├── tex
│   ├── context
│   ├── generic
│   ├── latex
│   │   ├── fuzz
│   │   │   └── fuzz.sty
│   │   └── mathz
│   │       ├── mathz_categories.sty
│   │       ├── mathz_complex_numbers.sty
│   │       ├── mathz_core.sty
│   │       ├── mathz_formal_specifications.sty
│   │       ├── mathz_groups.sty
│   │       ├── mathz_integers.sty
│   │       ├── mathz_lie_groups_and_algebras.sty
│   │       ├── mathz_manifolds.sty
│   │       ├── mathz_preamble.sty
│   │       ├── mathz-project.sty
│   │       ├── mathz_real_numbers.sty
│   │       ├── mathz_sets.sty
│   │       ├── mathz_topological_spaces.sty
│   │       └── mathz_vector_spaces.sty
│   ├── plain
│   ├── xelatex
│   └── xetex
└── texmf-tree.txt

29 directories, 41 files

```
#### BiBTeX

I also changed the TexShop BibTeX engine from `bibtex` to `biber`.

Recall that when typesetting a file that contains bibliographic citations in TeXShop, you need to
perform the following steps in order to produce the bibliography and citations:
1. Run LaTeX to generate the `.aux` file.
2. Run BibTeX to generate the bibliography input file.
3. Run LaTeX to include the bibliography.
4. Run LaTeX to fill in the citations.

TeXShop Advanced Help for BiBTeX has the following explanation:

> TeXShop can be used with this example in the following way. 
> First edit and typeset the document "myfile.tex" as usual. 
> Citations will appear in the output as "[?]" and the bibliography will be missing. 
> Then select "BibTeX" under the Program button and run BibTeX. Next select "LaTeX" and typeset again. 
> Citations will still appear as "[?]", but the bibliography will be added to the output. 
> Typeset a final time, and citations will have their correct values.

#### TeXShop Macros

TeXShop lets you define macros for inserting LaTeX commands into the document you are editing.
I defined several macros for Z Notation. 
They are stored in the file `~/Library/TeXShop/Macros/Macros_Latex.plist` which is an XML file that you can edit
directly or using the TeXShop macro editor.
I edited the text file directly, pasting in the Z commands from a copy taken from one of my other
machines.

I have created a document in the courses repo and have pulled in the article for real numbers.
I have added a Z paragraph. Next I need to create a shell script to typecheck it.

Break 6:07 pm

## 2025-01-12

### 9:00 am

The `fuzz` command finds the following errors in `supervised-learning.tex`.

```text
fuzz supervised-learning 
"supervised-learning.tex", line 43: Identifier \zeroR is not declared

"supervised-learning.tex", line 43: Identifier \R is not declared
```

I added `install` and `typecheck` shell scripts to the `courses/supervised-learning` article.
I created a placeholder `supervised-learning.sty` file.
Now the file typechecks cleanly.

- [x] Create an article for the Computational Commutative Algebra and Algebraic Geometry course.

## 2025-01-18

I made progress on an article about rings but think the formal definitions in it, 
and previous articles, are too complex.
I have listed several simplifications in a 
[GitHub ticket](https://github.com/agryman/mathz/issues/1).

I moved the rings article from `courses` into `mathz`.

I renamed the files in `mathz` to use hyphens instead of underscores as the separator character.
I previously thought it would be a good idea to use filenames that were valid Python module names
but now no longer think that is a good idea.

* [x] eliminate the `mzRing` prefixes from `mathz-rings.sty`
  * I replaced `mzRing` with `ring`
* [x] try using globally defined binary operators, e.g. `(\_ + \_)` as schema components
  * no problem for binary operators, it type checks correctly
  * problem for unary minus (negation), so use a LaTeX command
  * note that I had to define LaTeX commands for 0, 1, and unary -
  * clean up the sty file
* [x] format all articles to get the PDF versions

I renamed the `master` branch to `main`.

## 2025-01-19

Continue simplifying the `groups` article.

* [x] the `Carrier` schema does not simplify the notation so eliminate it
* [x] defining a structure to be a tuple doesn't simplify much so eliminate explicit structures
and just use tuples

## 2025-01-20

Continue simplifying the `groups` article.

## 2025-01-21

Continue simplifying the `groups` article.

## 2025-01-25

Continue simplifying the `groups` article.

## 2025-01-26

Continue simplifying the `groups` article.

## 2025-01-28

Continue simplifying the `groups` article.

* [x] simplify the `groups` article

## 2025-01-31

* use the group definitions in the ring definitions
* [x] reuse the commands defined in the groups package instead of defining more in the rings package

## 2025-02-01

* [x] define the sets of rings structures: rng, ring, commrng, commring

## 2025-02-02

Added subgroups to groups article.

## 2025-02-07

Write the *Zen of Z*

## 2025-02-08

continue to define homomorphisms for each of the four sets of ring structures: rng_hom, ring_hom, etc

## 2025-02-09

added checklist to formal specifications article

## 2025-02-11

work on completing the basic definitions in the rings article using the checklist

## 2025-02-12

continue cleaning up groups article

## 2025-02-12

continue cleaning up groups article

## 2025-02-17

continue cleaning up groups article

## 2025-02-21

continue cleaning up groups article

## 2025-02-25

continue cleaning up groups article

## 2025-02-27

continue cleaning up groups article

## 2025-03-04

continue cleaning up groups article

## 2025-03-06

continue cleaning up groups article
* included examples after definitions to make the article more intuitive

## 2025-03-14

continue cleaning up groups article
* added a semiformal proof
* added a commutative diagram
* my thinking has evolved as follows:
  * the readability of the article is greatly improved by the addition of examples and counterexamples
  * my confidence in the correctness of the article is reduced because the examples, remarks, 
and theorems have not been formally proof-checked
  * I am beginning to think that I should switch to Lean 4
  * my previous feeling that creating formal definitions
and statements of theorems would be useful without proofs
is less valid because without proof the correctness of the article
is in doubt
  * I can still create independent definitions that may duplicate parts
of mathlib, but I can do so in my personal namespaces
  * I can leverage mathlib by using it as a starting point
for topics not covered in mathlib
  * I think it would be useful to suspend work on mathz
and spend time learning Lean 4
  * in parallel, keep doing textbook exercises and try to use
Lean 4 for checking proofs and examples

## 2025-03-18

* I started to read some Lean 4 proofs and my reaction is that they are not very readable
* I therefore think that Z and Lean 4 are not mutually exclusive
* I think there is value striving to write readable Z specifications
* any formally stated assertion in a Z document should then be formally checked by Lean 4
* my plan was to automatically translate Z into Lean 4
* for bonus marks, it may be possible to use any informal proofs included in the Z 
as hints for generating a formal Lean 4 proof, perhaps using Generative AI
* make an effort to complete the groups article before spending time on Lean 4
  * this is an acid-test
  * my conjecture is that Z is easier-to-write then Lean 4

* completed magma containment
* improved magma intersection

## Magma Checklist

* [x] Magma, magma, magma_on
* [x] Magma_Map, magma_Map, magma_map
* [x] Magma_Hom, magma_Hom, magma_hom
* [x] Magma_Id, magma_id
* [x] Magma_Composition, \compMagma
* [x] Magma_Subset, magma_Subset, magma_subset
* [x] Magma\_Submagma, magma_Submagma, magma_submagma
* [x] Magma\_Restriction
* [x] Magma_Inclusion
* [x] Magma_Subimage, Magma_Image
* [x] Magma\_Containment, \subseteqMagma
* [x] Magma_Intersection, \capMagma
* [ ] Magma_Generation


# To Do

* [ ] develop the concept of the lattice of submagmas under inclusion
* [ ] define intersection of submagmas and show that the intersection of any family of submagmas is a submagma
* [ ] develop the concept of the submagma generated by a subset, namely the smallest submagma (under inclusion) 
that contains the subset
* [ ] define the union of submagmas as the smallest submagma that contains the subset consisting of the union
of the elements
* [ ] we now have meet and join operations so the submagmas define a boolean lattice
* [ ] define homomorphisms for each of the four sets of ring structures: rng_hom, ring_hom, etc
* [ ] formalize the remaining definitions in Chapter 1 of Atiyah-McDonald
* [ ] add discussion about fuzz type abbreviations to the article on formal specifications
* [ ] the articles are becoming hard to understand so add commutative or Venn diagrams
